Ruler docs + single binary inclusion (#2637)
grafana/loki: docs/sources/alerting/_index.md

---
title: Alerting
weight: 700
---

# Alerting

> Loki includes a component called the Ruler, adapted from our upstream project, Cortex. The Ruler is responsible for continually evaluating a set of configurable queries and then alerting when certain conditions happen, like the when they detect a high percentage of error logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Loki includes a component called the Ruler, adapted from our upstream project, Cortex. The Ruler is responsible for continually evaluating a set of configurable queries and then alerting when certain conditions happen, e.g. a high percentage of error logs.
```

## Prometheus Compatible

> When running the Ruler (by default in single binary form), Loki accepts rules files and then schedules them for continual evaluation. These are _Prometheus compatible_! This means the rules file has the same structure as in [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/alerting_rules/), with the exception that the rules specified are in LogQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When running the Ruler (which runs by default in the single binary), Loki accepts rules files and then schedules them for continual evaluation. These are _Prometheus compatible_! This means the rules file has the same structure as in [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/alerting_rules/), with the exception that the rules specified are in LogQL.
```

    rules:
    - alert: HighThroughputLogStreams
      expr: sum by(container) (rate({job=~"loki-dev/.*"}[1m])) > 1000
      for: 2m
```

### `<rule_group>`

```yaml
# The name of the group. Must be unique within a file.
name: <string>

# How often rules in the group are evaluated.
[ interval: <duration> | default = Ruler.evaluation_interval || 1m ]

rules:
  [ - <rule> ... ]
```

### `<rule>`

The syntax for alerting rules is (see the LogQL [docs](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/logql/#metric-queries) for more details):

```yaml
# The name of the alert. Must be a valid label value.
alert: <string>

# The LogQL expression to evaluate (must be an instant vector). Every evaluation cycle this is
# evaluated at the current time, and all resultant time series become
# pending/firing alerts.
expr: <string>

# Alerts are considered firing once they have been returned for this long.
# Alerts which have not yet fired for long enough are considered pending.
[ for: <duration> | default = 0s ]

# Labels to add or overwrite for each alert.
labels:
  [ <labelname>: <tmpl_string> ]

# Annotations to add to each alert.
annotations:
  [ <labelname>: <tmpl_string> ]
```

### Example

> A full fledged example of a rules file may look like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A full-fledged example of a rules file might look like:
```

### We aren't using metrics yet

Many nascent projects, apps, or even companies may not have a metrics backend yet. We tend to add logging support before metric support, so if you're in this stage, alerting based on logs can help bridge the gap. It's easy to start building Loki alerts for things like _the percentage of error logs_ such as the example from earlier:
```yaml
- alert: HighPercentageError
  expr: |
  sum(rate({app="foo", env="production"} |= "error" [5m])) by (job)
    /
  sum(rate({app="foo", env="production"}[5m])) by (job)
    > 0.05
```

### Black box monitoring

We don't always control the source code of applications we run. Think load balancers and the myriad components (both open source and closed third-party) that support our applications; it's a common problem that these don't expose a metric you want (or any metrics at all). How then, can we bring them into our observability stack in order to monitor them effectively? Alerting based on logs is a great answer for these problems.

> For a sneak peek of how to combine this with the upcoming LogQL v2 functionality, take a look at Ward's [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RwQlR3D4Km4) which builds a robust nginx monitoring dashboard entirely from nginx logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a sneak peek of how to combine this with the upcoming LogQL v2 functionality, take a look at Ward Bekker's [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RwQlR3D4Km4) which builds a robust nginx monitoring dashboard entirely from nginx logs.
```

A typical local configuration might look something like:
```
  -Ruler.storage.type=local
  -Ruler.storage.local.directory=/tmp/loki/rules
```

With the above configuration, the Ruler would expect the following layout:
```
/tmp/loki/rules/<tenant id>/rules1.yaml
                             /rules2.yaml
```
Yaml files are expected to be in the [Prometheus format](#Prometheus_Compatible) but include LogQL expressions as specified in the beginning of this doc.

## Future improvements

There are a few things coming to increase the robustness of this service. In no particular order:

- Recording rules.
- Backend metric stores adapters for generated alert and recording rule data. The first will likely be Cortex, as Loki is built atop it.
  - The first will likely be Cortex, as Loki is built atop it.

> - Introduce LogQL v2.

Reviewer 3: will this naming be evergreen?

Author: I don't know -- this doc will probably need some updates as things progress.

  rules: 
    - alert: http-credentials-leaked
      annotations: 
        message: "{{ $labels.job }} is leaking http basic auth credentials."
      expr: 'sum by (cluster, job, pod) (count_over_time({namespace="prod"} |~ "http(s?)://(\\w+):(\\w+)@" [5m]) > 0)'
      for: 10m
      labels: 
        severity: critical
```

### Alerting on High Cardinality Sources

Another great use case is alerting on high cardinality sources. These are things which are difficult/expensive to record as metrics because the potential label set is huge. A great example of this is per-tenant alerting in multi-tenanted systems like Loki. It's a common balancing act between the desire to have per-tenant metrics and the cardinality explosion that ensues (adding a single _tenant_ label to an existing Prometheus metric would increase it's cardinality by the number of tenants).

Creating these alerts in LogQL is attractive because these metrics can be extracted at _query time_, meaning we don't suffer the cardinality explosion in our metrics store.

Note: to really take advantage of this, we'll need some features from the upcoming LogQL v2 language. Stay tuned.

## Interacting with the Ruler

> Because the rule files are identical to Prometheus rule files, we can interact with the Loki Ruler via [`cortex-tool`](https://github.com/grafana/cortex-tools#rules). I know, I know, this should probably be rebranded, but the cutting edge requires sacrifices ;). The CLI is in early development, but works alongside both loki and cortex. Make sure to pass the `--backend=loki` argument to commands when using it with loki.

Author: Sorry! Force of habit 😭 .

The possible configurations are listed fully in the configuration [docs](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/), but in order to shard rules across multiple Rulers, the rules API must be enabled via flag (`-experimental.ruler.enable-api`) or config file parameter. Secondly, the ruler requires it's own ring be configured. From there the rulers will shard and handle the division of rules automatically. Unlike ingesters, rulers do not hand over responsibility: all rules are re-sharded randomly every time a ruler is added to or removed from the ring.

A full ruler config example is:

```yaml
ruler:
    alertmanager_url: <alertmanager_endpoint>
    enable_alertmanager_v2: true
    enable_api: true
    enable_sharding: true
    ring:
        kvstore:
            consul:
                host: consul.loki-dev.svc.cluster.local:8500
            store: consul
    rule_path: /tmp/rules
    storage:
        gcs:
            bucket_name: <loki-rules-bucket>
```

> ### Storage

Reviewer 2: Why is this h3 here with no content?
